----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

   Navigating through the   
          waves of emotion: 

            Depression 

 Our Pasifika people have long understood the moana and how to   

   navigate our way through it in order to make it to safe shores. 

 Our feelings and emotions are like the moana. At times, the sea is  

calm and still, making navigation smooth and easy. Other times, the  

 waves become rough and raging, with stormy conditions, making  

 navigation harder. Our feelings and emotions can change like the  

       waves, but - like our ancestors - when times are tough,   

        we can use our knowledge, values, skills, collectivity   

            to navigate safely through life’s challenges.  

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Depression   
Are we experiencing sadness or depression?  

It’s a normal part of life to sometimes feel sad, stressed and angry, especially when we’ve gone  

through really hard times - depression is more than this. Depression is being stuck with these  

feelings for a long time and we start losing hope and motivation. It’s an emotion that can feel like  

we are alone in the deep moana and caught in a powerful current, struggling to stay afloat.  

It’s important to know that feeling depressed is not a weakness; it is a common experience and  

with the right help we can get better. 

Life stressors – What impacts our wellbeing?  

There are many ways we can learn to navigate our way safely through the heaviness of depression. One of  

the first steps is to understand that different and multiple stressful events in life may lead to depression.  

Sometimes there’s just no clear reason for depression and that’s ok too. 

These are some of the common challenges in life that can make us feel depressed. Remember everyone  

responds differently to life events. 

                                                Losing  
                                                 job 
                             Serious                     Break       Work stress 
                              illness 
                                                           ups 

                                    Money troubles                                Family  
                                                                                  worries 
                                                                  Situations  
                        Death of                               that we cannot  
                     a loved one      Not having enough            control 
                                     support or resources 

                                                                                                                         2 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

Signs of depression  

Many of us know the signs that a storm is approaching – the clouds darken, the sea becomes  

choppy and there is a change in the air. There are also some common signs that tell us we might be  

experiencing depression.  

If we feel really low and don’t enjoy what we usually like – and this lasts for longer than two weeks, we may  

be experiencing depression. We may also notice having several of the signs listed below. However, it is  

important to remember this is a guide only and that we should seek the advice of a health professional or  

call 1737 if we think we may be experiencing depression.  

          Our feelings                                                 Our behaviour 

           »   We feel unhappy most of the time.                      »    Not getting things done at home,  
                                                                          school or work. 
           »   We feel a sense of emptiness or  
              numbness.                                               »    We have trouble sleeping. 

           »   We are no longer interested in the                     »    We don’t take care of ourselves, like   
              things that we used to enjoy.                               not showering, brushing our teeth or  
           »   We feel lost and alone.                                    eating well. 

                                                                      »    We might hurt ourselves on purpose. 
           »   We feel guilty and unworthy. 
                                                                      »    We might start using, or use more,  
          Our body                                                        alcohol or other drugs. 

           »   We might notice changes in our                         Our relationships 
              appetite, like not eating enough or  
              eating too much.                                        »    We start pulling away from aiga and  
                                                                          friends. 
           »   We might notice gaining or losing  
              weight in a short period of time.                       »    We feel less interested in seeing  
                                                                          others. 
           »   We experience aches and pains that  
              cannot be explained.                                    »    We get easily annoyed or irritated   
                                                                          with people. 
           »  We have low energy and no motivation  
              to do anything.                                         »   We think other people do not like us or  
                                                                          do not want to be around us. 
           »   We feel tired most of the time. 
                                                                      »   We do not feel like attending family  
          Our thoughts                                                    or social events. 

           »   We have negative thoughts about                        Our spirituality 
              ourselves and others. 
                                                                      »    We feel disconnected spiritually, from  
           »  We find it hard to focus, make  
                                                                          God, faith or a higher power. 
              decisions or remember things. 
                                                                      »    We lose our sense of peace within  
           »   We might have thoughts of self-harm  
                                                                          ourselves or with the world around us.  
              or wanting to die. 
                                                                      »    We feel dissatisfied or experience a  
           »   We start thinking everything is ‘too  
                                                                          lack of meaning in life.  
              hard’ and that things will not get better. 
                                                                      »    We pray less, start avoiding church  
           »   We believe that we are ‘not good  
                                                                          or other activities that usually give us  
              enough’.   
                                                                          peace, joy and calm.  

                                                                                                                            3 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

Coping with depression  
Navigating our way to safer shores 

Just as our ancestors had to face the fierce challenges of the moana, we must face the waves of depression.  

As our ancestors were able to arrive safely on our islands, we can work to get through depression to enhance  

our health and wellbeing.  

The following are some tips to help us navigate through depression. 

Remember, we can visit a health professional or call 1737 at any time if we feel our emotions are  

overwhelming and affecting our daily lives. 

          Take care of ourselves  

          We can face challenging journeys with more confidence when we look after our bodies. 

          »   Eating well can improve our mood, energy levels and  
              general health and wellbeing.  

          »    Sleeping well can help to give our brain and  
              body the rest it needs.  

          »    Being active and moving more can help us  
              to improve our mood, manage stress and  
              sleep better. 

          »    Avoiding alcohol and other drugs helps us to  
              think clearly and find longer-term solutions  
              for our problems. 

          Check out the Feel-Good section of the Mental Wealth website for more advice on self-care  

          www.mentalwealth.nz 

          Notice when our thoughts are drowning us 

          When we experience depression, we often get ourselves stuck in unhelpful thinking patterns.  

          This may include doubting ourselves, worrying about things more than usual and thinking that  

          we are not good enough. Practice noticing when these kinds of thoughts come up. When we can  

          catch our unhelpful thoughts, we can learn to handle them differently and find new ways to cope.  

          There are health professionals who are trained to help us manage unhelpful thinking patterns –  

          reach out. 

          Check out Aunty Dee if you need help working  

          through some thoughts and problems   

          www.auntydee.co.nz 

                                                                                                                        4 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

Talanoa (talk) with people we trust  

We are a relational people so connecting in with those we trust such as our aiga, friends and  

community can be really helpful. We can connect with others and be a part of a group, like a  

sports team or religious group, or even a depression support group; this can help us to feel like  

we are not alone. We can also get support from resources like those listed on the last page of  

this information sheet. 

 If talking to someone is not helpful the first time around,  

keep reaching out to find someone who is trustworthy  

and supportive.  

Check out Aunty Dee’s tips on talking for more ideas   

www.auntydee.co.nz/tips-and-help/talk 

Let our culture empower us 

There are many aspects of our Pasifika cultures that empower our sense of strength and pride.  

Connecting in with the traditions and practices of our cultures helps us to sustain a strong sense  

of who we are and where we belong. We need to be reminded of these positive truths when life  

gets us down and emotions like depression start to take over. Cultural practices can include  

koka’anga (Pasifika arts and crafts), practising a tau’olunga (dance), learning Pasifika songs or  

simply listening to our elders when they talk about our rich history.  

Check out ‘I AM’ on www.atumai.nz to explore Pasifika values, cultural benefits and create your  

own cultural legacy statement.  

Connect in spiritually 

Connecting in spiritually can mean connecting  

in with something like our faith, religion or  

something that is meaningful to us. For some this  

could mean praying, meditating or spending time  

with nature. Connecting in spiritually can help  

to keep us grounded and give us a sense of peace. 

Learn to relax 

Relaxing is a helpful way to deal with stress. Try listening to good music, going for a walk or  

taking a warm bath/shower. 

Relaxation is more than unwinding. We can all learn to relax better by focusing on doing one  

task at a time and trying to stay in the present moment, like focusing on the here and now. For  

example, when we have a conversation with someone, we put away our phones, turn the tv off,  

remove distractions and pay our full attention to the person and conversation in front of us. If we  

are alone, we might try focusing on how it feels to breathe in and out slowly. 

                                                                                                                 5 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

Connect with aiga and friends 

When we are feeling low, sometimes we withdraw from friends or  

our aiga, but this is the most important time to connect in with them  

because being alone can make us feel worse. Getting involved,  

spending time with them and even doing things for them can give us  

a feeling of purpose and wellbeing.  

Seek immediate help 

Sometimes people who are experiencing depression can have thoughts of harming themselves  

or thoughts of suicide. If this happens, seek professional help immediately (GP, counsellor,  

mental health worker) and involve others we trust to support us through these difficult times. 

Check out this resource that helps us develop a safety plan and cope with feelings of distress  

and suicidal thoughts. 

www.mentalhealth.org.nz/assets/OurWork/Downloads/Personal-safety-plan.pdf 

If someone is in immediate danger of serious self-harm, call 111. 

          E vave taunu’u le malaga pe a  
                    tatou alo va’a fa’atasi  

              Our destiny is within sight when we  
                       paddle our canoe together 

                                                                                                         6 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

Where to get help 

Psychological talking therapy is highly recommended for treating depression. These interventions can be  

provided by health professionals such as psychologists, counsellors, or someone trained in talking therapies.  

Your GP or family doctor can also help recommend an approach for you and might suggest suitable  

medications if required. If you’re at school or university, you may also be able to access a counselling or  

student wellbeing service.  

You can also text or freephone 1737, New Zealand’s free support service with qualified and confidential  

counsellors. Let them know what’s going on for you or the person you are concerned about, and they can  

support you or provide you with a list of services in your area. 

        Other helpful numbers you can call: 

        »   Lifeline – Advice and counselling support  
            0800 543 354 or text ‘Help’ to 4357 

        »   Youthline – Online community and support for young people.  

            0800 376 633, free text 234, webchat at www.youthline.co.nz  

        »   What’s UP – Advice & counselling support for 5-18-year olds; 12 noon to 11pm.   
            0800 942 8787  

        »   Kidsline – Advice & counselling support up to 14 years; 4pm to 9pm weekdays.  
            0800 54 37 54 (0800 KIDSLINE)  

Free Online Tools and Resources 

              A one stop-shop to support                   For when life sux,   
              young people to feel good                    Aunty Dee can help you  
                                                                                              E-therapy for young people who are  
              and stay connected.                          solve your problems.   
                                                                                             feeling down, worried or stressed.   
              www.mentalwealth.nz                          www.auntydee.co.nz 
                                                                                             www.sparx.org.nz 

              Culturally based tools to  
                                                           Support for young people  
              support Pacific young  
                                                           experiencing depression  
              people to unleash their                                                        A step-by-step approach for working  
                                                           or anxiety.   
              full potential.                                                                through depression. www.depression. 
                                                           www.thelowdown.co.nz 
              www.atumai.nz                                                                  org.nz/get-better/the-journal 

   Learn mindfulness to develop better          Info and resources for queer and  
  wellbeing. www.smilingmind.com.au             gender diverse youth. www.ry.org.nz          www.justathought.co.nz 

Published in July 2020 by Le Va, Auckland, New Zealand. 

© 2020. Pacific Inc Limited. 

ISBN: 978-0-9951015-7-9 (PDF) 

Recommended citation: Le Va (2020). Navigating through the waves of emotion: Depression. Auckland. New Zealand. 

Factsheets are for general information only. They should not be a substitute for medical or health advice. While every effort is taken to ensure the  
information is accurate & up to date, Le Va gives no warranties that this information is correct, current, or suitable for any purpose. We disclaim all  
responsibility and liability for any direct or indirect loss, damage, cost or expense whatsoever in the use of or reliance upon this information. 

                                                                                                                                                7 
