----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

    Navigating through the   
          waves of emotion: 

                   Anxiety 

  Our Pasifika people have long understood the moana and how to  

    navigate our way through it in order to make it to safe shores. 

 Our feelings and emotions are like the moana. At times, the moana  

 is calm and still, making navigation smooth and easy. Other times,  

the waves become rough and raging, with stormy conditions, making  

  navigation harder. Our feelings and emotions can change like the  

  waves of the moana, but - like our ancestors - when the waves are  

   rough, we can use our knowledge, values, skills, spirituality and  

           collectivity to navigate our way through safely.  

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Anxiety   
Are the things we worry about out of control?  

Anxiety is a normal human emotion that can feel like the ever-changing waves of the moana. It can be  

described as worry, feeling nervous or uneasy about something. Many people can experience anxiety when  

they are faced with a new or unknown situation, or when a stressful event happens. For example, some  

people feel anxious when they sit a test or have to speak in front of big crowds. 

    Helpful anxiety                                             Unhelpful anxiety 

    It is normal and even helpful to experience                 Sometimes, we might continue to feel high  

    anxiety sometimes as it helps us perform                     levels of anxiety thrashing about like waves  

    better by making us alert and motivated. An                 threatening to take us under. We can feel  

    example is when we are preparing to win a                   this way, even when the danger has passed  

    race. It is also helpful when we are faced                   but our minds trick us into believing it is  

   with situations that are stressful, frightening              still there. When this happens, anxiety can  

    or dangerous, such as when we need to run                    become unhelpful because it leaves us  

    away from a dangerous threat. During these                  feeling stuck and struggling, and it makes us  

    challenging situations, our bodies go through                blind to our own strengths and the positive  

    physical changes such as our heart beating                  supports around us.  

    faster, breathing faster, and muscles tensing  
                                                                When the massive waves of anxiety  
    up. This response is known as ‘fight or flight’,  
                                                                overwhelm us, it can take over our lives. As a  
    and it is our body’s natural way of preparing  
                                                                 result, we may avoid or stop doing the things  
   to quickly react so we can feel safe again. 
                                                                that give us joy, like spending time with the  

                                                                 people we care about and who care about us.  

                                                                 It can stop us from going to work or school or  

                                                                get in the way of our relationships with aiga  

                                                                 and friends. Some of us might still do the  

                                                                things that we enjoy, but we may feel tense  

                                                                 and fearful while doing them, which can drain  

                                                                our energy.  

                                                                                                                           2 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

Signs of anxiety   
Can you see a storm approaching? 

There are many ways we can navigate safely through the crashing waves of anxiety. But first we must  

learn to notice the signs in ourselves and our surroundings. As our ancestors learned to look for signs of  

a dangerous storm approaching, we too can learn to look for the signs of our worries and anxieties. 

Everyone experiences anxiety differently. There are some common signs to let us know that the waves  

may get rough and we need to start preparing to calm the waters. Look out for these signs: 

       Our body                                                       Our feelings 

       »   Our heart starts beating faster.                           »   We always feel worried. 

       »   Our chest feels tight.                                     »   We may start feeling more annoyed,  
                                                                          irritated or restless. 
       »   We feel tense in our bodies and may  
           start feeling aches and pains.                             »   We could feel overwhelmed and   
                                                                          ‘out of control’. 
       »   We feel sick in the tummy. 
                                                                      »   We may even start feeling sad  
       »   We may start getting headaches or  
                                                                          and depressed. 
           feel dizziness.  

       »   We have trouble sleeping.  
                                                                      Our relationships 

                                                                      »   We start pulling away from aiga  
       Our thinking                                                       and friends. 

       »   We might have trouble concentrating                        »   We feel less interested in  
           and find it hard to stay focused. 
                                                                          seeing others. 

       »   We start thinking and believing only  
                                                                      »   We get easily annoyed or irritated  
           bad things will happen. 
                                                                          with people.  

       »   We start doubting ourselves eg What  
                                                                      »   We may even start taking our   
           if I can’t do this? What if I fail? What if  
                                                                          feelings out on others and end   
           nobody likes me? 
                                                                          up hurting them.  

       Our behaviour 
                                                                      Our spirituality 
       »   We find it hard to chill out and relax. 
                                                                      »   We feel disconnected spiritually – from  
       »   We might notice changes in our                                 God, faith or a higher power.  

           appetite eg not eating enough or  
                                                                      »   We lose our sense of peace within  
           eating too much.                                               ourselves or with the world around us.  

       »   We may begin to avoid situations  
                                                                      »   We feel dissatisfied or experience a  
           or places that are stressful, or feel  
                                                                          lack of meaning in life.  
           stressed while we are in these  
           situations and places.                                     »   We pray less and/or start avoiding  
                                                                          church or other activities that usually  
       »   We find it hard to make decisions.  
                                                                          give us a sense of peace, joy and calm. 

                                                                                                                              3 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

Coping with anxiety   
Navigating our way to safer shores 

Just as our ancestors had to face the fierce challenges of the moana, we must face the frightening waves  

of anxiety. As our ancestors were able to arrive safely on our islands, we also can get through anxiety and  

live life to its fullest potential.  

Here are some tips to help us navigate through anxiety. 

       Take care of ourselves  

       We can face challenging journeys with more confidence when our basic needs are met, and  

       we build ourselves a solid foundation. 

       »   Eating well can improve our mood, energy levels and general health and wellbeing.  

       »   Sleeping well can help to give our brain and body the rest it needs.  

       »   Being active and moving more can help boost our mood, manage stress and sleep better.  

       »   Avoiding alcohol and other drugs helps us to think clearly and find longer-term solutions  
           for our problems. 

       Check out the Feel-Good section of the Mental Wealth website for more advice on self-care  

       www.mentalwealth.nz 

       The power of our thoughts can keep us afloat 

       Being aware of our thinking and noticing unhelpful  

       thoughts help us understand what increases our  

       anxiety and makes things worse. When we can catch  

       our unhelpful thoughts, we can learn to handle them  

       differently and find new ways to cope. One way of doing  

       this is to note down our thoughts on paper (or phone/ 

       device) and then figuring out which thoughts make us  

       feel better or worse. 

       Connect in spiritually 

       Connecting in spiritually can mean connecting in with something like our faith, or religion,  

       or something that is meaningful to and bigger than us. For some of us this could mean  

       praying, meditating, or spending time with nature. Connecting in spiritually can help  

       to keep us grounded and give us a sense of peace. 

                                                                                                                             4 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

Breathe 

Taking slow deep breaths can help us to interrupt the physical cycle that causes our hearts  

to beat faster, our tummies to feel sick, and our bodies to tense up. When the currents of  

anxiety are strong and overwhelming, slowing down and taking deep breaths can allow us to  

clear and calm our minds so we can make wise decisions and navigate to safety. 

»   Try practising this – breathe in through your nose for 4 seconds; hold your breath for  
    4 seconds; and then breathe out through your mouth for 4 seconds. Repeat these steps  
    at least three times. 

        Inhale                           Hold                         Exhale  
         4 seconds                      4 seconds                       4 seconds 

Talanoa (talk) with people we trust  

We are a relational people so connecting in with our aiga, friends and support people can  

be really helpful. Talking with people that we trust and that are supportive can help us to  

understand what’s going on. We can talanoa with our aiga, friends, a counsellor, church  

leader or elder. We can connect with others and be a part of a group, like a sports team or  

religious group; this can help with feelings of loneliness when we are anxious. We can also  

get support from online communities or resources like those listed at the end. 

 If talking to someone is not helpful the first  

time around, keep reaching out to find someone  

trustworthy and supportive.  

Check out Aunty Dee’s tips on talking for more ideas  

www.auntydee.co.nz/tips-and-help/talk 

                                                                                                                 5 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

Let our culture empower us 

There are many aspects of our Pasifika cultures that empower our  

sense of strength and pride. Connecting in with the traditions  

and practices of our cultures helps us to sustain a strong sense  

of who we are and where we belong. We need to be reminded of  

these positive truths when life gets us down and  

emotions like anxiety start to take over. Cultural  

practices can include koka’anga (Pasifika arts  

and crafts), practising a tau’olunga (dance), learning  

Pasifika songs, or simply listening to our elders when they talk  

about our rich history.  

Check out ‘I AM’ on www.atumai.nz to explore Pasifika values,  

cultural benefits and create your own cultural legacy statement.  

Surviving a storm builds resilience 

When we avoid situations that make us feel anxious, things might seem okay for a short  

time, but it can actually make our anxiety worse in the long term. Sometimes facing our  

fears can help us to realise things are not as bad as we might think. When we realise we  

can survive a storm, we can see these situations as opportunities for learning, growing and  

gaining confidence. 

           E vave taunu’u le malaga pe a  
                      tatou alo va’a fa’atasi  

               Our destiny is within sight when we  
                        paddle our canoe together 

                                                                                                                6 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

Where to get help 

Psychological talking therapy is highly recommended for treating anxiety. These interventions can be  

provided by health professionals such as psychologists, counsellors, or someone trained in talking therapies.  

Your GP or family doctor can also help recommend an approach for you and might suggest suitable  

medications if required. If you’re at school or university, you may also be able to access a counselling or  

student wellbeing service.  

You can also text or freephone 1737, New Zealand’s free support service with qualified  

and confidential counsellors. Let them know what’s going on for you or the person you  

are concerned about, and they can support you or provide you with a list of services in  

your area. 

If you want to talk to someone confidentially or ask questions, try these free numbers. 

        »   Anxiety helpline – Anxiety New Zealand Trust’s free helpline  
            0800 269 4389 (0800 ANXIETY)  

        »   Youthline – Online community and support for young people.  
            0800 376 633, free text 234, webchat at www.youthline.co.nz  

        »   What’s UP – Advice & counselling support for 5-18-year olds; 12 noon to 11pm.   
            0800 942 8787  

        »   Kidsline – Advice & counselling support up to 14 years; 4pm to 9pm weekdays.  
            0800 54 37 54 (0800 KIDSLINE)  

Free Online Tools and Resources  

              A one stop-shop to support                    For when life sux,   
              young people to feel good                     Aunty Dee can help you  
                                                                                              E-therapy for young people who are  
              and stay connected.                           solve your problems.   
                                                                                              feeling down, worried or stressed.   
              www.mentalwealth.nz                           www.auntydee.co.nz 
                                                                                              www.sparx.org.nz 

              Culturally based tools to  
                                                            Support for young people  
              support Pacific young  
                                                            experiencing depression  
              people to unleash their                                                         A step-by-step approach for working  
                                                            or anxiety.   
              full potential.                                                                 through depression. www.depression. 
                                                            www.thelowdown.co.nz 
              www.atumai.nz                                                                   org.nz/get-better/the-journal 

   Learn mindfulness to develop better          Info and resources for queer and  
  wellbeing. www.smilingmind.com.au             gender diverse youth. www.ry.org.nz           www.justathought.co.nz 

Published in July 2020 by Le Va, Auckland, New Zealand. 

© 2020. Pacific Inc Limited. 

ISBN: 978-0-9951015-8-6 (PDF) 

Recommended citation: Le Va (2020). Navigating through the waves of emotion: Anxiety. Auckland. New Zealand. 

Factsheets are for general information only. They should not be a substitute for medical or health advice. While every effort is taken to ensure the  
information is accurate & up to date, Le Va gives no warranties that this information is correct, current, or suitable for any purpose. We disclaim all  
responsibility and liability for any direct or indirect loss, damage, cost or expense whatsoever in the use of or reliance upon this information. 

                                                                                                                                                 7 
