----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

      Information about   
      dementia and support  

This information sheet is for anyone who is worried about dementia or   
wants to know more about dementia. Help is only a phone call away.   
Go to www.alzheimers.org.nz or ring 0800 004 001 for more information  
and support. 

What is dementia? 

Dementia is a term used to describe symptoms (the experience of a physical  
or mental problem) caused by changes in how our brains work. Alzheimers  
disease is the most common type of dementia. 

Anyone can get dementia. As people get older, the chance of getting dementia  
increases.  

The most common symptoms are changes in memory, thinking, behaviour,  
personality, and emotions. These symptoms get worse as brain changes increase. 

Dementia is different for everyone – what is experienced, and how fast the  
changes occur. 

Early symptoms  

The early signs and symptoms of dementia can be hard to notice. Many  
illnesses can cause dementia-like symptoms. Some of these illnesses are  
treatable. That is why you should see your doctor or health care provider if  
you are worried.  

Finding out if you have dementia means you can get help earlier. You can get  
support, information, medication, and time to plan. 

1   INFORMATION ABOUT DEMENTIA AND SUPPORT 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Memory lapses versus memory loss  

It is important to understand what is dementia and what is not dementia. We  
all forget things as we get older. This does not mean we are getting dementia.  

Examples of warning signs of dementia can include:  

•  Recent memory loss that causes problems in daily life 

•  Difficulty performing regular tasks such as cooking a meal or managing bills 

•  Problems with language  

•  Decreased or poor judgment 

•  Changes in mood and behaviour such as being more easily upset in new  
   situations 

Forms of dementia  

Two of the most common forms of dementia are: 

•  Alzheimers disease  

   This is the most common form of dementia. Around two-thirds of people  
   with dementia have Alzheimers disease. Changes seen in the brain include  
   shrinkage and a build-up of abnormal proteins (plaques and tangles). 

•  Vascular dementia  

   This is the second most common form of dementia. It is caused by poor  
   blood supply to the brain. The symptoms can begin suddenly after a stroke  
   or slowly as disease in the blood vessels worsens.  

Family links with dementia  

Some forms of dementia can have family links. About a third of people with  
Alzheimers disease have or had a close relative (parent, brother, or sister) with  
dementia. The dementia is not always inherited and for many people there’s  
no family history. 

For any concerns about a family history of dementia, talk to your doctor. Many  
treatable conditions can cause memory lapses, confusion, and forgetfulness. 

2   INFORMATION ABOUT DEMENTIA AND SUPPORT 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

Information and support  

If you are concerned that you, or someone you know, may have dementia, talk  
to your doctor or your healthcare provider.  

If you find out you have dementia, help is available. Alzheimers NZ has many  
resources about dementia. These resources cover many questions that you  
may have.  

The booklet About Dementia: A guide for people diagnosed with dementia   
provides information on: 

•  What dementia is 

•  The early warning signs and diagnosis 

•  Brain health and risk reduction 

•  What support is available  

•  Future planning 

This information sheet provides a general summary only and is not a substitute  
for informed professional advice. Any person with dementia or memory  
loss (including family/whānau and other who provide support) should seek  
professional advice about their individual situation. Alzheimers New Zealand is  
not liable for any error or omission in this publication, as a result of negligence  
or otherwise. This information sheet was produced in 2023. 

      Go to www.alzheimers.org.nz or ring 0800 004 001   
      for more information and support. 

3   INFORMATION ABOUT DEMENTIA AND SUPPORT 
