Fijian Idioms (listed in alphabetical order)
B
1. baca kuita. Literally translated as “octopus bait.” The expression is usually used when enticing someone. In conversation, someone may ask in jest, “O iko baca cava?” What bait (enticement) are you using? The reply is, “Na baca kuita.” This implies something enticing that will surely succeed!
2. E sega ni dua na nomu baigani eke. Literally translated as, “It’s none of your eggplant” meaning ‘It’s none of your business.’
3. Vunibaka ga sa tevoro. Literally translated as “The banyan tree is the devil!” It means that a big person may on first impression look very impressive but beware as he can be dangerous too.
4. mate vakabalabala. Literally translated as “To die like a fern tree.” The idiom indicates that someone died childless, like a fern tree (balabala). The fern that grows abundantly in forests does not have suckers or seeds.(Editor’s Note: It grows through its spores.)
4. Vosa mada o iko, e rovu e liu na batimu. Literally translated as, “Please go ahead and talk, because your teeth sprouted first.” The expression is usually said in jest when two people talk at the same time. One will say, “Please go ahead and speak. You are my elder. Your teeth sprouted first.”
5. Basu bawara. Literally translated as “To break open an unopened flower shoot.” Bawara is the spathe (unopened flower shoot) of the coconut palm. A spathe bursts open as it dries and matures, and reveals its flowers. It means that a person (usually young) wants to break free of discipline in the home, village or the workplace.
The Flying Fox a fruit and insect eating bat is the inspiration of 4 idioms.
6. (Slang idiom used especially amongst young people) beka ni bogi Literally translated as ‘the night bat” (Slang) A person who is active only at night.
7. lako vakabeka or vuka vakabeka. Literally translated as ”to go like a bat” or “to fly like a bat.” It means that someone takes his own food when going on a journey or that someone finds one’s own food and thus is not dependent on others. (Sometimes it has subtle connotations of someone being westernized!)
8. samusamu beka means that someone stands around idly while others are working.
9. tuvani vaka bati ni beka Literarily translated as “Very neatly arranged like the teeth of a bat.
10. gunu wai ni bele. Literally translated as ”To drink the boiled juice of the hibiscus spinach (bele) (which is unpleasant!).” It means that someone is humiliated and / or being reprimanded.
The reef heron (belo) is the subject of 2 idioms:
11. domo ni belo Literally translated as “The cry of a heron.” It means that an individual has had a very light meal, perhaps just a cup of tea for lunch or dinner.
12. Sa suru na belo. Literally translated as “The heron has sneezed.” It means that the allocated work for the day is done. It has been completed.
Fijian idioms on bici, the banded rail bird.
13. Ketekete ni bici na lomalagi translated as “It is a fine clear sky with light strips of cloud, like the breast of the bici.”
14. E lauta na bici na kena ikolo. Literally translated as “The bici bird gets hit with the projectile meant for it.” It means that someone gets a just punishment. The punishment fits the crime.
Fijian idioms on the ‘coconut’shell cup.
15. bilo cicila. Literally translated as, “Like a leaky cup.” It means that someone cannot be relied upon.
16. bilo vata (usually said in jest as in Daru sa bilo vata or Kedaru sa bilo vata. Usually said as a joke by a man to a woman “Let’s share the same cup” It implies that they have much in common, and should have an intimate relationship.
17. vakabilo (Literally translated as “S/he has a cup.” It means that someone has occult powers derived from pouring a cup of yaqona (kava) to an evil spirit.
Another meaning of vakabilo in a positive sense is someone of chiefly rank who has been installed by having been given the official cup to drink. The individual has been given the ceremonial cup of yaqona (vagunuvi) to the chiefly position s/he has been installed in.
18. Dui seva ga na bua ka tea: Translation: You will reap the bua (frangipani) that you planted. Meaning: You will reap what you sow. (Usually said when something bad happens to someone whose evil/negative behavior may have caused it.)
19. Maca na wai ka boko na buka. Literally translated as “There’s no more water and the fire has gone out” It means that the cupboard is bare in the sense that there is no more kava, tobacco, food etc.
20. vakabula ika levu Literally translated as “The big one (fish) got away”. It means that you missed your big chance. The big fish was saved (by escaping). .
21. kana buta Literally translated as “to eat food that is cooked and ready.” This refers to a person who expects to be fed or rewarded as if he had helped substantially in the work activity.
22. Au butuka tu. Literally translated as “I am standing (on) my ground.” This is a defiant response (said in a good natured way) to someone from another place who is acting with presumption. This might be said by a Vitilevu highlander to someone from the smaller islands, a kai-yanuyanu.
23. butu cala Literally translated as “to put one’s foot on slippery ground.” It means that someone makes a gaffe of impropriety in traditional custom, such as speaking out of turn in a formal situation.
C
1. kana cagi Literally translated as “to eat wind!” It means that someone has nothing to eat.
2. tamata vakaicaqe Literally translated as “someone capable of kicking!” It implies that a particular individual is an influential person. Implies that one is rich and powerful.
3. caqe veva Literally translated as “to kick paper around” It means “to fool around, doing nothing.”
4. Sulukui na vudi, e dua e cika? Sulukui na vudi refers to ripening stalks of plantain that are cut and covered with leaves on the ground but they do not deceive the kikau birds. e dua e cika? Does someone have conjunctivitis? (That s/he is not able to see that the ripe plantain are concealed with leaves) It means (in conversation) ,”You are trying to hide something from me as if I cannot see clearly.
5. malumalumu vakacikinovu Literally translated as “looks weak like a centipede.” It means that a man may looks harmless but is dangerous like a centipede,
6. cokacoka na vula. Literally translated as “trying to strike the moon (vula) with a spear.”
It means that one is too ambitious, striving for the impossible, This idiom often refers to a person desiring a certain romantic match that is impossible.
7. E dua ga na siga ni cola qele. Literally translated as “It is only one day of carrying soil.” Meaning as expressed in a conversation: “Let’s try hard to finish this work; we surely can finish it today.”
8. curu vale Literally translated as “to enter a house or to sneak into a house. Meaning: To abscond with someone else’s spouse. Refers to a man taking another man’s wife or taking in a mistress.
9. tamata curu-suka Literally translated as “person entering in and out” Meaning: An offender who is regularly in and out of prison.
D
These two idioms use the word "daba”. It refers to mud lobsters and rock lobster crabs having their seasonal egg bearing plump (with considerable meat) around April.
. Sa daba o iko! Meaning: “You’re awesome, you’re great!”
2. Sa daba! Meaning: “That’s marvelous”
3. vaka e cavu na dalo matua. Literally translated as ‘like mature taro being pulled out of the ground easily.” It means that something is done easily and quickly.
4. Na dalo e tei ka vakasulina. Literally translated as “Taro is planted and has suckers.” It means that a woman has responsible, caring parents who must be approached traditionally by a suitor seeking her hand in marriage.
5. kena na isamu ni dawa. Literally translated as “S/he has been struck by the projectile used to bring down lychee fruits from the tree.” It means that someone has suffered from someone else’s actions. .
6. Tara na dike ni niu qai kevu. Literally translated as “touched the ‘dike’, the central branch of a bunch of coconuts then fell.” This assumes that someone climbed a coconut tree (to get coconuts) but quit the effort after reaching close to the (dike) goal. It means that someone did not accomplish what he set out to do.
7. vakuli-ni-dilo: Literally translated as ‘like the bark of a dilo tree. (Dilo is a seaside tree used for making wooden drums, furniture, boat keel) It means that a man is very strong, implying that he is not easily hurt and having tough skin.
8. waiwai dilo: Literally translated as “dilo oil.” (The dilo tree has nuts that is used for oil for body massage.) It means “to sweet-talk someone to get what is wanted.”
9. Na nomu dodomo sa vaka e dua na tiaina dreu. Literally translated as “Your love is like a ripe banana.” It means that it is ‘puppy love’. It won’t last.
10. dramica na vusi Literally translated as, “The cat licked it up” It means that some food or item is so relished / desirable that it disappeared quickly, or something has been stolen secretly.
11. Sa dre ko Malolo. Literally translated as, “Malolo is pulling” or “The sun is setting.” (Malolo Island is in the west of Vitilevu Island, off the coast of Nadi). It may mean that something is coming to an end. It can also mean that time is being wasted in idleness.
12. Dromu na vula, dromu vata kei na kena kalokalo. Literally translated as. “The moon sets and its star sets with it.” It means that the death of one individual can quickly bring on the death of a spouse, close relative or associate.
13. Dua mai keri! Literally translated as “Your turn!” (to speak, tell a story, entertain the group). This is said by someone, in a pleasant tone, who has just finished telling a yarn.
14. Dui mate ga ena nona ucu ni vatu. Literally translated as “Each person is ready to die defending his home territory.” It means that there is a close attachment to the land and when cornered, a Fijian will fight to the death.
15. ucu mai duru: Literally translated as “Taking out of the knee” or “Like a nose growing out of the knee. It means that it is fiction, unbelievable, a tall tale.
F & G
1. Meca i a fika ga, or Meca qo na fika ga. Literally translated as, “The thing is to think it through” It means that ‘things will be done or solved in due time (by hook or by crook!)
2. sili vaka ga (siliva vaka maina) Literally translated as “to bathe like a duck or a mynah bird” Usually said to a child who takes a quick, superficial bath, not bathing properly.
3. dau gasa yawa Literally translated as “always wanting something that is inaccessible.” This is often said of an individual who stays away from home, feeling more comfortable elsewhere.
4. Daru qai laki sota ki na gasau leka. Literally translated as, “We will meet next at the place where the short reed grows (at Bua, supposedly the jumping-off place to the next world, after death). It means that we are not likely to meet again
5. silima na gau ni dali Literally translated as “to dive for the middle (rather than the end) of a rope fallen in the water.” It means that someone intrudes in a conversation.
6. Mo muria na nomu gaunisala. Literally translated as “You should follow your appropriate path .It means that one is to follow proper protocol, as in the formalities of entering a village, or approaching a chief.
K
1. vakaseuta na bure ni kadi Literally translated as “to scratch into an ant’s nest” It means “to stir up trouble.”
2. Sa kala na matanisiga. Literally translated as “The sun is setting.” It means that someone is getting old.
3. matai via kana vuaka. Literally translated as “The carpenter who wants to eat pork” It refers to a person who might pretend to be hard working and skilled but is only interested in how the work is rewarded.
4. Sa kua la na kana! Literally translated as “I do not feel like eating.” It implies playful flattering words said to a pretty girl. It implies that she is so pretty that an admirer looking at her has filled his stomach up that he does not feel like eating.
. Kana, kana! Ka o lakova mai. Literally translated as “Eat, eat! That’s what you came for.” Usually said when teasing a friend who is passing by during a meal and is invited to join in.
6 vakarokoroko vakanace. Literally translated as “showing respect like a mullet” It means that one fails to give proper respect, just as a mullet skips out of the water to avoid the larger predatory fish.
7. vakania na qio Literally translated as “to feed the sharks” It means that one vomits at sea when seasick.
8. Oi au sa kara. Literally translated as “I am still thirsty.” It implies that the person wants another mix of kava.
9. kasivita na vale: Literally translated as “to spit (or simulate) spitting on the house.” This refers to celebrating the completion of a newly constructed home. This is usually fun filled kava drinking with the home owner as host. The celebration is called ikasiviti ni vale.
10. katakata vakurokava: Literally translated as “like a tin pot that heats up quickly (and then cools off very quickly too) It refers to a person’s temperament becoming quickly hot then quickly cold. People may start off some activity with great enthusiasm, but may lose interest quickly.
11. E kauta tu ga na ketena. Literally translated as “He takes his stomach.” It means that someone goes to a feast, dinner or function bringing only his/her stomach, with no food or gift, just to eat “free”.
12. tabu rogoca na kere ni cakau. Literally translated as “does not listen to the sound of the waves crashing against the reef.” Usually said of one who does not listen to instructions or good advice.
13. Sa moce na koli e matadravu. Literally translated as “The dog sleeps in the fireplace (where food is cooked). It means that there is no food at home.
14. Rogo ikuru. Literally translated as “Hearing about it.” It means that someone intrudes into an event or feast without being invited. The person crashed the party by just hearing about it.
15. Sa lala tu na koro. Literally translated as “The village is empty (of people)” It may mean that the chief is absent or that a chief has not been installed yet.
16. kana e bele ni ilalakai Literally translated as “to eat at the edge (bele) of the chiefly food-tray.” This is said of a dependent or pretentious person who tries to act as if he is a member of the important household (when he is not).
L
1. lauti koya na sui ni kena. Literally translated as “The fish-bone from his own food pierced him.” It means that he got caught in his own trap.
2. lave na rara. Literally translated as “lifted up the playing field.” It means that the visiting team has won.
3. Sa dreu na kena leba. Literally translated as the leba fruit is ripe. (Leba is an indigenous forest tree with white flowers, highly scented ribbed fruit, deep purple when fully ripe and used as a dye. Women also use its scented fruit in garlands.) It means that everything is going very well and done in a timely manner.
4. lesu tale na koli i na nona lua Literally translated as “The dog returns to its vomit.” It means that one desires what has been previously rejected.
5. Me ra leuta mada na malamala mai na matadra. Literally translated as “Please remove the beam (or plank) in your eye.” It means that it is the height of hypocrisy to point out a minor flaw (sin) in another, when your sins are much worse
6. lumuta na moivi Literally translated as “to oil the moivi war club.” (Moivi was a type of warclub made from the moivi tree.) It means that someone is retelling or rehashing a well- worn story. To continue relating stale news.
M
1: macake na beka Literally translated as “The bat is diabetic.” Idiom is said in jest as bats are never affected by eating sweet things as humans do. It may mean that, for example, A lady has worn a dress or ornament that is overdone (over-dressed) that even bats may be affected by the excessive sweetness. May also be said of a very enticing explanation that is overdone. (Idiom is usually said in a good natured way.)
2. Maqa na leqa! Sa matua na raisi. Literally translated as “There is no problem! There is rice at hand.” It implies that we should not be worried. Everything is okay.
3. Mate na toa, kena isau na bici. Literally translated as “The chicken is dead, (given away or stolen), and all that is given in return is a bici (small bird).” It means that the exchange is not of equal value.
4. Mate o vale dua ka bula ko vale rua. Idiom suggests that one lives well who can eat at two different houses but might die of hunger if one eats only at one’s own family home. Usually said good naturedly to someone invited to join in eating a meal at someone else’s house, who declines with natural politeness.
5. qase molau Literally translated as “old man resembling the molau.” It refers to a man who is no longer young but acts as if younger than his years, particularly in relation to women (sexually active), an expression used in humor. The molau tree has young-looking heartwood though the outside wood and bark look aged.
N
1. kana vaka nasi Literally translated as “eating like a nurse.” It means that one eats delicately with overly refined, very careful manners. This comes from the notion that nurses are very careful in measuring out doses of medicine, and meticulous in their way of working.
2. Ki Namuka vata ga nikua. Literally translated as “We will all reach Namuka today.” It means that it makes no difference if one travels one way or another. The result is the same. We will all get there at the same time.
3. Tu na inima, ka luvu na waqa. Literally translated as “the bailer was there but the boat sank.” It means that the solution (to a problem) was at hand but nobody thought of it.
4. niu ga kei madrai Literally translated as “It’s just a matter of coconuts and bread.” It is just the same whether I say 6 of 12, or half a dozen. There is no difference. There is nothing much to choose between them. It’s nothing special, just routine (of people), comparing two things that are of equal value.
5. Sinai na noqu noke. Literally translated as “My (seafood) basket (noke) is full.” Meaning:
I have a lot of gossip/stories to tell.
6. Sa lili toka na noke. Literally translated as “The seafood basket is still hanging up (and you have not yet gone fishing).” Meaning: Don’t talk about what will be achieved till the work is underway.
7. leka na noqu iqilai Literally translated as “My iqilai is too short “ iqilai is the wooden crook used to pull and gather grass to be cut when clearing land, or used to roll up a carpet of grass after it is cut loose with the knife. It is also used to pull down branches to reach fruit to be picked. Meaning: I do not have the power or authority to do that. That is beyond my reach.
R
1. rekirekitaki waqa vou Literally translated as “being thrilled over a new boat.” Meaning: To fill thrilled over something (for example a child with a new toy) over a short period until its novelty wears off. Also refers to an emotion that will soon pass,
2. Vakavuti sara ga na rewai, qai vuku na kai Viti. Literally translated as “As soon as the eel develops fur, then the Fijian will become wise.” Meaning: It will take a very long time to happen.
3. E sega ni rogo mai na toa mai na nomu koro Literally translated as “The fowl crying from your village is not heard here.” {The jungle fowl is symbolic of a warrior.} Meaning: However important you may be in your territory (Vanua), it means nothing here.
S
1. vaka e siri na saku Literally translated as “like the saku skims on the surface. Meaning: Someone is very fast. Saku is the edible garfish which skims on the surface of lagoons.
2. E tubua na sala ki na nona koro Literally translated as ”The path to his/her village is overgrown.” Meaning: S/he has lost connection to the village and rarely visits it. To renew relations to one’s village is cara sala to “clear or sweep the path”. It is a cultural process, requiring gifts of goods, and time spent to build affirming relations.
3. kemu isau, sa vuni tu. Literally translated as “your reward remains concealed” Meaning: Your reward (success) will come in time.
4. vaka savu liga Literally translated as “wash one’s hands of any responsibility.” Meaning: A person is uninvolved, ineffectual and idle.
5. Sa sere na koli. Literally translated as “The dog is let off the leash” This idiom refers to people suddenly freed from restriction or discipline who may act a little wild.
6. kila vakasigalevu Literally translated as “know by noon.” Meaning: To know something very clearly.
7. Sa vaka na siko dai. Literally translated as “It is like checking the (animal) trap (with frequent regular visits)” Implying that the visitor is perhaps too pressing; too frequent.
8. sa na siri na duamu Literally translated as "your legs will get knocked out from under you" Usually said to a man attracted to a girl. It means that he will fall hopelessly in love.
9. solisoli vakatoa Literally translated as “give like a rooster (who offers the female some food in the beak and then grabs it back}” Meaning: Giving and then taking back,
10. solia na kesuna Literally translated as “to turn one’s back (in disdain) Meaning: To reject an approach or request.
T
1. dabe ena ibe qai kisi ki na tabakau. Literally translated as “to sit on a fine mat, and then shift to the crude matting of tabakau.” Meaning: Usually said about someone who was riding high in social status, and was then reduced to a lowered status.
2: tagitagica na yaloka ni mata ni vonu. Literally translated as to “cry for/like the eyes of a turtle.” (When caught and beached the turtle’s eyes exude tears, appearing to cry. Those tears are in vain.) Meaning: This applies to someone who yearns for what is impossible.
3. talai vakatoa Literally translated as “sent on an errand like a chicken.” Usually said in reference to a child who is slow and unreliable when sent on an errand. (Like a chicken, the child is diverted, losing track of the purpose of the mission.)
4. tala or tala simede Literally translated as to “unload cement” Meaning: It may refer to having sex after long abstinence. (b) vaqara tala Literally translated as “to go and unload.” Meaning: To look for sexual opportunities. (c) Me laki rawataki ikeri na nomu tala? You are going to try your luck there at having sex?
5. tali magimagi Literally translated as “to plait sinnet.” Meaning: To chat together. To tell a story or report in very great detail.
6. tara-koro Literally translated as “to build/touch village.” Meaning: To gossip together, as an informal group, about people, relatives, news from the villages (koro).
7. tara reveni Literally translated as “to touch the ribbon,” Meaning: To reach the limit, accomplish the goal (sometimes said when drinking yaqona), come to the end.
8. e tavidi na vusi Literally translated as “to proceed quietly, as a cat moves.” Meaning: They went about their work quietly
9 kana yava ni toa Literally translated as “to eat chicken feet” Usually said to a child who is hyper-active, unable to sit still.
10. Sa dui cagi ni toba Literally translated as “Each bay has its own different wind” Meaning: Your authority is effective in your territory (Vanua), but is irrelevant here in this territory. Each can be a chief in his own land.
U
1. were ubiubi Literally translated as “to fake the work of cutting grass, weeds, by just knocking vegetation down to lie against the ground.” Meaning: To pretend to work. This idiom may imply that someone is not telling the whole story, that they are concealing some truth.
2. Sega ni ura me sa tei damu. Literally translated as “no prawn just turns red (unless someone has cooked it.” Meaning: Where there is smoke there is fire. The truth will come out. There must be a cause for something to happen, and the truth will be known.
V and Y
1. vaka e vidi na ura Literally translated as “like a prawn springing into action.” Meaning: It conveys the notion of something that jumps suddenly into action, as the prawn does.
2. Sa viritaki na kena vatu. Literally translated as “a stone has already been thrown at it.” Meaning: It is already decisively rejected. Can also mean that the decision has been made to quit something, such as a game. A child may spit on a stone and throw the stone into the bushes to indicate that he is quitting a game. The notion is that if you found the stone he would be forced to stay
3. veivunauci vaka i Ra kasala. Literally translated as “to give advice as a kasala fish does” Meaning: You are good at giving advice but failing to follow that advice yourself.
4. Sa suasua na yavamu. Literally translated as “Your legs are still wet” This implies that you are new to this place, having just arrived ashore. You are a newcomer here and should not speak with assurance.
6. Yavita dole na mataisau Literally translated as “to club the carpenter prematurely.” Meaning: To judge a job prematurely before the work has been completed.
